SOURCE: https://www.who.int/india/health-topics/road-safety
TITLE: Road Safety — India
ORG: World Health Organization (WHO India)
RETRIEVED: 2026-08-24

Road safety - India
Skip to main content
Road safety
Estimates suggest that India lost approximately 300 000 lives due to road crashes in  the year 2016. Upto 50 times this number suffered injuries, with some of them developing disabilities. A majority of those dying on the roads are pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists. According to government data, young people are more vulnerable, especially those who are the sole bread-earners for their family. The economic loss from road traffic injuries is expected to be approximately 3% of the country’s gross domestic product.
Many road crashes are a result of faulty road design and engineering. Non-adherence to legislation is a major reason for road crashes. While over speeding remains the most common reason for road fatalities, other contributing factors include driving under the influence of alcohol, driving on the wrong side of the road, jumping red lights, using mobile phones while driving, not wearing a securely strapped quality helmet, skipping wearing the seat belt and fatigue. There is an urgent need for multisectoral response to address this growing challenge.
A road traffic injury is a fatal or non-fatal injury incurred as a result of a collision involving at least one moving vehicle. Globally, there were 1.25 million road traffic deaths in 2013. As against popular perception and usage in common parlance, a road traffic injury is not an accident. Oxford dictionary defines the term accident as “an event that happens by chance or that is without apparent or deliberate cause.” There are known risk factors leading to road traffic injuries. Most road traffic injuries and fatalities are largely preventable.
India accounts for about 10% of road crash fatalities worldwide. Estimated road traffic death rate per 100 000 population in India has increased from 16.8 in 2009 to 18.9 in 2013. Over the last decade, the incidence of accidental deaths has witnessed an increasing trend with an increase of 44.2% for the year 2011 as compared to 2001. This figure translates into one death every five minutes on Indian roads and this is expected to escalate to one death every three minutes by 2020.
A multipronged approach is needed to strengthen automobile safety standards, improve road infrastructure, generate awareness, strengthen enforcements and streamline trauma care assistance.
Technical links
Fact sheets
Road traffic injuries
Data
Road Safety – Global Health Observatory
Violence and injury prevention – Data collection publications and resources
Death on the roads: a data visualization of the report
Guidelines
Fatal injury surveillance in mortuaries and hospitals: a manual for practitioners
Injury surveillance guidelines
Guidelines for conducting community surveys on injuries and violence
Save LIVES: a road safety technical package (2017)
Preventing injuries and violence: A guide for Ministries of Health
WHO Resolutions
Improving global road safety – Resolution adopted by the UN General Assembly on 12 April 2018
Improving global road safety  – Resolution adopted by the UN General Assembly on 15 April 2016
-
News
All →
18 October 2018
Highlights
2nd Road Safety Sensitization Workshop for Journalists
26 April 2018
Highlights
Workshop on Road Safety with the Industry
13 November 2017
Highlights
Road Safety Journalism Fellowship
12 July 2017
Highlights
Strengthening Road Safety Legislation: Saving Lives Photo Gallery
Publications
All →
26 June 2026
Implementing what works in alcohol policy: progress report on the SAFER initiative
Alcohol-related harm causes millions of deaths each year and remains a major, preventable obstacle to health, equity and sustainable development. This...
Download
Read More
8 May 2025
Promoting walking and cycling: a toolkit of policy options
This toolkit presents a compendium of policy options for walking and cycling, highlighting the multiple benefits that promoting and enabling safe walking...
Download
Read More
17 December 2024
Global status report on road safety 2023: country and territory profiles
The country and territory profile report accompanies the Global status report on road safety 2023 and is the last of the  three report-related products...
Download
Read More
2 September 2024
WHO South-East Asia Regional status report on road safety: Towards safer and sustainable mobility
The WHO South-East (SE) Asia Region, home to over a quarter of the world’s population, faces unique challenges when it comes to reducing road traffic...
Download
Read More
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases
Related links
Injury Prevention Literature
Global Plan: Second Decade of Action on Road safety
Speed management: decision making guidelines for policy makers
Day to come: 8
th
UN global Road safety week